[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> You OK?
I heard you scream earlier.
Was it another dream?
You were an Indian watching
Columbus' ship materialize out
of thin air. (WHISPERING) Wow!
And this medicine
man kept hitting you.
Cool!
Hey, maybe it was a past
life or a parallel reality
or a future life.
>> Get real!
>> Or maybe that dream was
trying to tell you the truth.
I guess it just depends
on what you think is real.
Maybe you should try
different anxiety pills.
>> My pills are fine, OK?
Thank you.
>> Well, I have
to go get dressed.
I hope you feel better, Amanda.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[DOOR SLAMMING SHUT]
>> God, Amanda, you
can be such an asshole.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> People ask me, why does
quantum mechanics matter given
that it's all little tiny
stuff, and who cares?
There are three
possible answers.
From a practical point of view,
it doesn't make any difference
at all.
I mean, you still have to go
to work and drive your car
and do all that
and the rest of it.
From a second point
of view, it actually
infiltrates everything in the
world, especially the world
of electronics.
When you go to the
supermarket and you
do the scanning at
the checkout, that's
a quantum mechanical effect.
But I think the
important part is
the third one,
which is essentially
a philosophical issue.
Why are philosophers
so passionate
about deconstruction, the
assumptions of the world?
I finally got it.
I got it as a result of
looking at quantum mechanics
and comparing it to
classical mechanics.
They present two very different
ways of thinking about the way
that the world works
and about what we are.
So from a classical
perspective, we are machines.
In a machine, there's no room
for conscious experience.
It doesn't matter
if a machine dies.
You can kill a machine.
You can throw it in a dump.
It doesn't matter.
If that is the way
that the world is,
then people will
behave in that way.
But there's another way of
thinking about the world, which
is suggested-- it's pointed
to by quantum mechanics, which
suggests that the world is
not this clockwork thing,
but it's more like an organism.
It's a highly interconnected
organismic thing
of some type, which extends
through space and time.
And that kind of
environment, what I think
and the way that I behave,
has a much greater impact
not only on myself but
on the rest of the world,
than it would if it
was a classical world.
So from a very basic
point of view, having
to do with morals and ethics.
What I think affects the world.
I mean, in a sense that's really
the key for why a worldview
change is important.
>> Let's talk about
the subatomic world,
and then we'll talk about what
it's telling us about reality.
The first thing I want to tell
you about the subatomic world
is it's totally
a fantasy created
by mad physicists
trying to figure out
what the heck is
going on when they
do these little experiments.
By little experiments, I mean
big energy in little spaces
and little pieces of time.
It gets pretty nutty at
that realm of things.
And so subatomic
physics was invented
to try to figure that all out.
We need a new
science down there.
It's called quantum
physics, and it
is subject to a whole range
of debatable hypotheses,
thoughts, feelings, intuitions
as to what the heck is really
going on.
>> So on the one hand, you
had a theory which from
the conceptual standpoint
was profoundly puzzling.
And on the other hand, from
the practical standpoint,
was vastly more
successful than anything
we had ever seen before.
This is the kind of situation
that produces the tension
that all of the
investigations of foundations
of quantum mechanics are
feeding off of since then.
Because on the one
hand, this is an acutely
paradoxical, puzzling,
conceptually confusing theory.
On the other hand,
we have no option
along the lines of throwing
it out or neglecting it,
because it is the most powerful
proven tool for predicting
the behaviors of
physical systems
that we have ever
had in our hands.
>> The universe is very strange.
There seem to be two sets of
laws that govern the universe.
In our everyday,
classical world,
meaning at roughly our
size and time scales,
things are described
by Newton's laws
of motion set down hundreds
and hundreds of years ago.
And they worked very well
for billiard balls and cannon
balls and gravity.
However when we get
down to a small scale,
when we get down to
say the level of atoms,
a different set
of laws take over.
These are the quantum
laws, quantum theory,
quantum mechanics.
And at that level, particles
may be in multiple places
at the same time.
They may behave
as waves, smeared
out spatially and temporally.
They may be interconnected
over great distances.
They may be unified
into one quantum state,
into one state governed
by one way function.
And the border
line, the threshold,
this curtain between the quantum
world and the classical world
is really mysterious.
It's called, sometimes, the
collapse of the wave function,
because at the quantum world,
everything is in superposition
of multiple possibilities.
And in the classical world,
these multiple possibilities
seem to collapse to
particular definite choices.
So everything is in
one particular place.
>> When electrons move
about the atomic nucleus,
they do so in orbits.
You have seen such models of
the atom in high school books.
You can easily recall them.
But the subtle
part comes when we
think of how does the
electron jump from one
target to the other,
a jump that is
associated with the emission
of light from atoms.
Atoms emit light in the process.
But how does the electron jump
from one orbit to another?
Niels Bohr was the first
one to point this out.
And these radical
electrons never
go through the intermediate,
intervening space.
Electrons never
traverse any space
in making this transition.
They just are in
the higher orbit,
and then they are
in the lower orbit.
No space in between.
So how does one make the jump?
If you think in terms of
continuity of movement,
you can't find answers to that.
So quantum, fundamentally
then, needs a discontinuity.
This word quantum-- originally,
it just meant quantity.
In Latin, it just
means quantity.
But that's not the way we
use it in quantum physics.
From the beginning, we use the
word quantum in quantum physics
to signify discreteness.
And now, signify a quantum
leap, a discontinuous movement.
>> Quantum mechanics guarantees
that the deeper you go,
the more energetic
nature becomes.
It's for this reason
that nuclear power
is a million times more
powerful than chemical power.
Why?
Because chemical
power represents
the molecular manipulation.
Nuclear power emerges from
a nuclear manipulation,
but the nucleus is a million
times smaller and a million
times more fundamental and a
million times more powerful
than the chemical level.
So the deeper you go,
the smaller you go,
quantum mechanics says the
more dynamic you become.
The unified field exists
at the ultimate scale
of the Planck scale, 10 to
the minus 33 centimeters.
>> The Planck scale is the
very smallest level of reality.
If we go down in scale,
we're at meters, centimeters.
If we go down to
atoms, they're 10
to the minus eighth centimeters.
Keep going down
and down and down.
Space time is
smooth until we get
to the basement floor,
the bottom level,
where there's a pattern.
There's a fabric, if you will.
There's some kind of
coarseness or irregularity.
And that's at-- what's
called the Planck scale,
after Max Planck, the
German physicist--
roughly 10 to the
minus 33 centimeters.
And the Planck time is 10
to the minus 43 seconds.
So things are very, very small
and happen very, very fast.
Now, despite the fact that
they're very, very small,
space time is everywhere.
So the entire universe
is created at this level.
And Einstein's relativity says
when this fabric curves up,
it forms mass.
And that's what
matters is made of.
>> The notion that things that
we touch with our hands, feel,
are made of ideas or concepts
actually is probably an older
idea that we might have thought.
And it's a difficult idea to
really grasp or get a hold of,
but let me try to
explain it this way.
When we began to look at
small corners of space
and little pieces
of time, we began
to see that the objects
that we discovered
in these regions
of space and time
weren't just
persistently existing.
They were kind of popping,
like bubbles in bubble wrap.
Pop, pop, pop.
On and off, on and off.
And in order to explain
that, we wondered
what they were doing when they
weren't appearing as pops.
What were they before that?
Then we did more
refined experiments,
and we found that we could take
objects and let them interact,
then fly apart, and
then measure something
about one of the objects.
And we'd find that the
other object would also
change at the same time that
the first object was even
looked at.
And it was if something
popped over here-- instantly,
the other one would pop, whereas
if we hadn't popped this one,
this one will just pop randomly.
So how could pop one
be connected to pop two
when they weren't separated?
So this gradually
led into some notions
that there was an invisible
connection between everything.
Physicists give this a name.
They call it entanglement,
or we can now
speak of it in terms of a
state or an invisible state.
We call it a state vector
or a quantum wave function,
because it seems wavy.
It seems spread out over
space and time, rather than
concentrically localized
in one place at one time.
However, this wave
function isn't just
a wave of matter like an
ocean wave or a sound wave
or any kind of wave of matter.
It's a wave of possibility.
It's a kind of thought wave.
And because it is a wave of
thought or possibility or not
matter, it's invisible to us.
But we can't explain
what we do see
as matter in these small
corners of space and time
unless we picture that these
matter particles somehow
come out from, or emerge
from these thought
wave patterns which
are invisible to us.
>> Quantum mechanics is
really the play and display
of information, the play
and display of potentiality.
Waves of information, waves
of potential electron--
and it's important,
the word potential.
This isn't the
world of electrons.
It's the world of
potential electrons.
But you have to ask the
question, waves of what,
really?
What is the field
that is waving?
Is it the ocean?
No.
It's a universal ocean, an
ocean of pure potentiality,
an ocean of abstract
potential existence.
We call it the unified field
or super strength field.
And that's what we're made of.
>> Connectivity among all
things is a basic constituent
of the fabric of reality.
It's very difficult to
wrap your mind around that,
but Erwin Schrodinger
said-- he's
one of the founders
of quantum mechanics--
that entanglement, which is
this idea of this connectivity,
is not just a property
of quantum mechanics.
It's the property.
It's the property of quantum
mechanics that makes it
very, very strange,
and it doesn't
seem to fit in with our ordinary
world or ordinary experience.
But in fact, it actually does.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Want to shoot some hoops?
You know, you don't
have to be like that.
Come on and play.
Look, he likes you.
Don't you have time for
a little one on one?
How long has it been
since you played?
Come on, you've got the ball.
Take a shot.
No no, my lady.
Not from there.
It's out of bounds.
Got to be on the
court to be in play.
Welcome to Duke Reginald's
Court of Unending Possibilities.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Court rules-- got to
sink the last one.
>> That hurt.
>> It never touched you.
>> Right.
>> And it's not solid.
This ball is mostly empty.
>> We were all taught in
school that the world is made
of stuff, of matter,
of mass, of atoms.
Atoms make up molecules.
Molecules make up materials,
and everything is made of that.
But atoms, actually,
are mostly empty.
For example, if this ball
were the nucleus of an atom--
a proton and a hydrogen
atom for example--
then the electron
circling this, which
would describe the outer
limits of that atom,
would be out by that
mountain over there,
roughly 20 miles away.
And everything in
between is empty.
In fact, the universe
is mostly empty.
However when we go down
in scale, in the emptiness
we eventually come to
a fundamental level
of space time geometry, the fine
basement level of the universe
where there's information.
There's a pattern.
It's called the
Planck scale, and it's
the fabric of the universe.
And at that level,
there's information that's
been there since the Big Bang.
So most of the universe, even
of matter, is actually empty.
>> Most people think
that the vacuum is empty.
But for internal
self consistency
of quantum mechanics
and relativity theory,
there is required to
be the equivalent of 10
to the 94 grams of mass energy.
Each gram being e equals
MC squared kind of energy.
Now that's a huge number, but
what does it mean practically?
Practically, if I can assume
that the universe is flat--
and more and more,
astronomical data
is showing it's
pretty darn flat--
if I can assume that,
then if I take the volume
or take the vacuum within
a single hydrogen atom,
that's about 10 to the
minus 23 cubic centimeters.
If I take that amount of vacuum
and I take the latent energy
in that, there is a
trillion times more energy
there than in all of the
mass of all of the stars
and all of the planets out
to 20 billion light years.
That's big.
That's big, and if
consciousness allows
you to control even a
small fraction of that,
creating a Big
Bang is no problem.
>> Organizations like NASA,
British Aerospace are all
trying to tap into
this incredible,
unimaginably large energy sea.
And they feel if
they can tap this,
we can travel to
different galaxies.
So they understand
that in empty space,
there is this
unbelievable energy.
>> When you begin to
really grasp this,
you begin to grasp the enormity
of the energy that would be
involved in going
down this rabbit hole.
What is available for
us to use in the future
to take us to the stars?
The issue is we are perturbing
this with consciousness.
With directed consciousness
and intention,
we are changing
things at the vacuum
level which then allow us to
access a new level of physics.
So we can do that at
that level, not so much
at the atom molecule level.
That's a secondary effect.
So we were already
doing it, in essence.
We're already getting into the
rabbit hole by using intention.
>> We're really living
in a thought universe,
a conceptual universe.
Quantum mechanics is
just the play and display
of potentiality.
>> If you put it that there
is an intangible world that
affects the tangible
world of our experience,
and if you then say that's
what quantum mechanics says--
and granted, that's
a fair way of trying
to put into English
something which is very, very
difficult to grasp--
but it then leads quite
naturally to the conclusion
that quantum mechanics says that
there is a spiritual world that
makes this choice.
There is another world
that is intangible
that affects and influences
the physical world.
And really, while that
statement might be true,
quantum mechanics absolutely
does not say that.
That intangibility, however,
is itself the bedrock
of physical reality.
It may be intangible,
but it is--
we can't really say what
it is or why it's there.
But it is, in fact, the most
fundamental feature of matter.
So you can say, well, if
it's a feature of matter,
that's not intangible.
I mean, matter is the
most tangible of things.
I mean, these are word games.
The fact of the matter is that
matter is not what we have long
thought it to be.
To the scientists,
matter has always
been thought of as
sort of the ultimate
in that which is
static and predictable.
And the more you understand the
material aspect of something,
the more perfectly
predictable it is.
What quantum
mechanics illustrates
is that, that is
simply not true.
>> The major basic idea that
quantum physics implies,
which makes us understand
or even think about this new
paradigm-- the thing, which is
that there's this underground--
there's got to be a realm of
existence which cannot be ever
touched on or seen, which
bubbles into the existence,
giving rise to our
understanding of the world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The tighter physics have
tried to grasp on to physical
reality, to understand
what it's really made of.
What are the core
building blocks
of life at the basis of it all?
Life, the universe slips
through your fingers.
And you come up with
something that's
increasingly
abstract, increasingly
abstract to come to the
realm of pure abstraction.
And that's what the
unified field is.
It's pure, abstract potential,
pure abstract being, pure
abstract self-aware
consciousness,
which rises in
waves of vibration
to give rise to the
particles, the people,
everything we see in
the vast universe.
[MUSIC CONTINUES]
>> What makes up things
are not more things.
But what makes up things are
ideas, concepts, information.
>> And like I said,
it never touches.
>> Another strange fact is that
objects never really touch each
other.
When I dribble this
ball, the atoms
of the ball and the atoms of
the ground never actually meet.
>> So nobody touches nothing.
Come on, put your stuff down.
Nobody's going to take it.
Like I said, this is my court.
It's no problem.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> How long has it been?
>> I'll be late.
>> The first inkling in
physics that we got that time
ain't what it seemed to
be came with relativity.
That was the first inkling
that time was not absolute.
It was not the absolute
ruler of the universe.
That God almighty did not
say one second, one second,
one meter, one meter.
You're in a gravitational field.
Your head is actually moving
at a slightly faster rate
than your feet.
>> The second law of
thermodynamics says that things
unwind and move forward.
So that gives an era of time.
But at the quantum world,
in the micro world,
the second law of thermodynamics
doesn't seem to hold.
And things can go
backwards or be timeless.
>> The fundamental equations
of motion that we have,
both in classical mechanics
and in quantum mechanics,
have this property called
time reversal symmetry.
OK, there is a
certain way in which
they don't distinguish between
the past and the future.
Or to put it
slightly differently,
these equations entail that for
any process that's possible,
the same process happening
backwards is possible.
Now when I say
happening backwards,
I don't mean going
backwards in time.
I mean, as time goes forward,
the reverse sequence of things
happens, OK?
The world isn't like that.
There are all sorts of what
people refer to as time
asymmetries in the world.
And people usually
chop these asymmetries
up into three different levels.
Level one, there
are all sorts of
ordinary physical processes--
ice melting, smoke spreading
out in a room, people
getting wrinkly as they get
old, so on and so forth--
that we never see
happening in reverse.
Two, we have a very different
kind of epistemic access
to the past than we
do to the future.
That is that the ease with
which we can know things
about the past and the way in
which we come to know things
about the past and the detail
with which we can know things
about the past is utterly
different than the ease
and the access and the detail
that we have to the future.
Three, an asymmetry
of influence.
We have a very deep
conviction that by acting now,
we can affect the
future but not the past.
Given the complete time symmetry
of the fundamental equations
of motion, all of
these three asymmetries
are extremely mysterious.
And moreover,
they're asymmetries
that play an incredibly
fundamental role
in every second of our lives.
So that's been a puzzle hanging
over physics for a long time.
Where does this asymmetry
come from if not
the equations of motion?
The equations of
motion are supposed
to be the whole story
about how the world works.
But in that story,
these asymmetries
don't show up at all.
And yet, these asymmetries
are profound, ubiquitous,
inescapable features of
every second of our lives
in the world.
>> One of the most
unpalatable ideas still,
in spite of the fact that
quantum physics has been around
a long time, is the possibility
or the notion that the future
can have a causative
effect on the present.
We believe that the past
can have a causative effect
on the present.
I hold the ball.
I drop it, it falls.
Cause, effect-- when
it hits the ground.
But could the
ground be the cause
of my dropping the ball
in the first place?
>> It's only in conscious
experience that it seems that
we move forward in time.
In quantum theory, you can
also go backwards in time.
And there's some
suggestion that processes
in the brain related to
consciousness project backwards
in time.
For example, in the late
1970s a neurophysiologist
at University of
California San Francisco
named Ben Libet did some
very famous experiments.
What Libet did
was study patients
who were having neurosurgery
on their brains,
with their brains exposed,
while they were awake.
They were given a
local anesthetic
to numb the area of
the skull and scalp
to access their brains.
And they were awake, and Ben
would talk to these people.
So for example, what he did was
stimulate their little finger
and look at the part
of the sensory cortex
on the opposite side
that was related to that,
record from it electrically,
and ask the patient
when he or she felt the
stimulus on the little finger.
And he would also stimulate at
that particular area of cortex.
Now what you would
think would be
that if you stimulate
the little finger,
it takes a finite period of
time to get to the opposite side
of the cortex.
So the patient would report
it a fraction of a second
later after the stimulus.
And when you
stimulated directly,
the patient would
report it immediately.
He found just the opposite.
When you stimulated
the little finger,
the patient felt it immediately.
And when he stimulated
directly on the cortex,
there was a delay.
After sorting
through all the data
and repeating this
over and over,
Libet came to the conclusion
that somehow the brain
was projecting information
backwards in time.
So it did take a
finite amount of time
to get to the sensory
cortex, but the brain
projected it
backwards in time so
that the conscious
perception was
that the stimulus was felt when
the pinch actually occurred.
>> There have been some studies
which have shown that when
people are beginning to move
a hand or beginning to say
something, there's actually
activity in the brain
in certain nerve
cells of the brain,
even before they become
consciously aware of what
they're trying to do.
>> In baseball, scientists
showed that if you study how
a batter can hit a pitch
coming at 100 miles an hour--
considering the recognition,
the visual processing,
the motor response, the
reflexes, synaptic delays--
it's impossible.
That was his conclusion.
How could it be accomplished?
Well, one possibility is that
as the batter is standing there,
the ball comes across
the plate and the batter
sees where the ball is,
recognizes it, and decides
where to swing by
the time the ball
is already in the
catcher's mitt.
But the information is
projected backwards in time
so that he or she swings
at the previous time
when the ball is just
coming across the plate.
This could be
happening all the time
in our normal everyday
consciousness.
And there's some
other experiments
that have shown this.
Dick Berman and Dean Radin
have done some experiments
where a subject sits
at a computer screen
and watches a series of images,
which may be somewhat bland
or may have highly
emotional content.
And they just study their
galvanic skin response
as a means of emotion.
And they vary the timing of when
the pictures going to occur.
So the subject doesn't
know exactly when
it's going to occur.
What they find is
that, not surprisingly,
the emotional pictures give
a much greater response.
But both the emotional and
the unemotional responses
show up a half a
second to two seconds
before the stimulus actually
occurs on the screen.
And a fellow named Chester
Wiley replicated this, not only
in humans but in worms.
So this may be possibly a
very widespread phenomenon
of backwards projection in time.
The only explanation is
through quantum physics.
>> Pat Price was a
fantastic remote viewer.
And he was supposed to
draw where his traveler was
going, as usual.
And he drew two tanks
and a swimming pool.
And when the investigators
looked at it,
the scientist said Pat
must've just got it
wrong this time, because he was
right about the swimming pool.
They had sent their
traveling partner
to the municipal swimming
pool in Palo Alto.
And they said Pat just
got it wrong this time.
Months later, one
of the scientists
received something from the
Palo Alto Chamber of Commerce.
And it had images of
the municipal swimming
pool 50 years earlier.
And what they saw was
the swimming pool,
but two tanks exactly
where Pat had drawn them.
And so what Pat's
mind had done was not
to see what the swimming
pool was in present time.
He saw it back as
it was 50 years ago.
>> I know it seems to me that I
often do things and then decide
a fraction of a second
later what to do.
But I've already done that.
>> We're beginning to see
that even time itself is not
sacrosanct.
We're allowed now to get
into it in a different way.
David Deutsch, Oxford physics
professor, was, I think,
one of the prime inventors
of quantum computation,
the quantum computer.
And he is very much into
parallel universes and time
travel and says all the
paradoxes now of time travel.
You can go backwards
and farther.
Go backwards in time and knock
off your father and mother
before they have
you and come back,
and you're still
alive and no paradox.
And even to explain
that is difficult to do,
but nevertheless, put them
in a parallel universe
and it's no problem.
So these are the
kinds of things we're
doing in physics right now.
We're thinking.
We're rethinking time.
And it may very well
be that the next phase
of time travel in
a physical device
may be in the next 50
to 100 years from now.
>> Science suggests to us that
parallel universes are living
simultaneously, that we're
living 100,000 lives or five
lives-- you know, however
much you can handle--
simultaneously, and that
all the things that we do
are at work right now.
>> I'll be late.
>> You can always
go back in time.
[DISTANT CHEERING]
[BUZZER]
What's the matter?
Remember, it's empty.
>> How do you know this shit?
>> I read "Dr. Quantum" comics.
Everybody thinks it's just kid's
stuff, but I know it's real.
It's how I do my
magic on the court.
>> Yo!
What they taught us in
school isn't really the way
it is, and our senses
are playing tricks on us.
We've just got to wonder,
what is this reality that we
find ourselves in?
Quantum physics says it's all
just waves of information.
Do I believe that?
I hope so!
Yikes!
>> It's how I do my
magic on the court.
>> Yeah.
I always choose the
wonder boy first.
>> Dr. Quantum says
everybody's got it.
Everybody's doing it.
And doing it constantly,
each and every time you look.